update fastify doc and quickstart (#1555)
clerk/clerk-docs: docs/quickstarts/fastify.mdx

    }
  ]}
  beforeYouStart={[
    {
      title: "Set up a Clerk application",
      link: "/docs/quickstarts/setup-clerk",
      icon: "clerk",
    },    {
      title: "Add Fastify as your backend",
      link: "https://fastify.dev/docs/latest/Guides/Getting-Started",
      icon: "fastify",
    }
  ]}
>
  - Create a Clerk application
  - Install `@clerk/fastify`
  - Set your Clerk API keys
  - Configure `clerkPlugin` for all routes
  - Use `getAuth()` to access the auth state and protect routes
  - Configure `clerkPlugin` for specific routes
</TutorialHero>

Learn how to integrate Clerk into your Fastify backend for secure user authentication and management. This guide uses TypeScript and allows you to choose your frontend framework.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> [Fastify is only compatible with Next.js versions 13.4 and below](https://github.com/fastify/fastify-nextjs). If you're using a newer version of Next.js, consider using a different backend framework that supports the latest Next.js features.
>
> This guide uses ECMAScript Modules (ESM). To use ESM in your project, you must include `"type": "module"` in your `package.json`.

> [!NOTE]

> > If you're using ECMAScript Modules (ESM) in your project, you must include `"type": "module"` in your `package.json` to enable ESM support in Node.js.

Reviewer: this needs to get removed

---
title: Fastify Quickstart
description: Learn how to integrate Clerk for secure authentication and user management into your application using a Fastify backend.
---

<TutorialHero
  framework="react"
  exampleRepo={[
    {
      title: "Fastify Quickstart",
      link: "https://github.com/clerk/clerk-fastify-quickstart"

    }
  ]}
  beforeYouStart={[
    {
      title: "Set up a Clerk application",
      link: "/docs/quickstarts/setup-clerk",
      icon: "clerk",
    },    {
      title: "Add Fastify as your backend",
      link: "https://fastify.dev/docs/latest/Guides/Getting-Started",

>       icon: "fastify",

Reviewer 2: I've added the "fastify" icon here: https://github.com/clerk/clerk/pull/679

    }
  ]}
>
  - Create a Clerk application
  - Install `@clerk/fastify`
  - Set your Clerk API keys
  - Configure `clerkPlugin` for all routes
  - Use `getAuth()` to access the current auth state
  - Use `getAuth()` to protect specific routes
  - Configure `clerkPlugin` for specific routes
</TutorialHero>

Learn how to integrate Clerk into your Fastify backend for secure user authentication and management. This guide uses TypeScript and allows you to choose your frontend framework.

> > [!IMPORTANT]
> > [Fastify is only compatible with Next.js versions 13.4 and below](https://github.com/fastify/fastify-nextjs). If you're using a newer version of Next.js, consider using a different backend framework that supports the latest Next.js features.

Reviewer: We don't want to stack two callouts. We can simply combine the two.

```suggestion
> [!IMPORTANT]
> [Fastify is only compatible with Next.js versions 13.4 and below](https://github.com/fastify/fastify-nextjs). If you're using a newer version of Next.js, consider using a different backend framework that supports the latest Next.js features.
>
> This guide uses ECMAScript Modules (ESM). To use ESM in your project, you must include `"type": "module"` in your `package.json`.
```

> [!NOTE]
> If you're using ECMAScript Modules (ESM) in your project, you must include `"type": "module"` in your `package.json` to enable ESM support in Node.js.

<Steps>

>   ### Create a Clerk application
> 
>   You need to create a Clerk application in your Clerk Dashboard before you can set up Clerk Fastify. For more information, refer to the [Set up your application](/docs/quickstarts/setup-clerk) guide.
> 

Reviewer: This is included in the prerequisites. There doesn't need to be a step for this

```suggestion
```

  ### Install `@clerk/fastify`

>   Once your application is ready, install [Clerk's Fastify SDK](https://github.com/clerk/javascript/tree/main/packages/fastify). The SDK gives you access to our prebuilt components and hooks for your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [Clerk's Fastify SDK](https://github.com/clerk/javascript/tree/main/packages/fastify) has prebuilt components, React hooks, and helpers to make user authentication easier.

To get started using Clerk with Fastify, add the SDK to your project:
```

>   <CodeBlockTabs type="installer" options={["npm", "yarn", "pnpm"]}>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <CodeBlockTabs options={["npm", "yarn", "pnpm"]}>
```

    ```
  </CodeBlockTabs>

  ### Set your Clerk API keys

  <SignedIn>
    Add the following keys to your `.env.local` file. These keys can always be retrieved from the [API Keys](https://dashboard.clerk.com/last-active?path=api-keys) page of your Clerk Dashboard.
  </SignedIn>

  <SignedOut>
    1. Navigate to the Clerk Dashboard.
    1. In the navigation sidebar, select [API Keys](https://dashboard.clerk.com/last-active?path=api-keys).
    1. In the **Quick Copy** section, copy your Clerk publishable and secret key.
    1. Paste your keys into your `.env` file.

    The final result should resemble the following:
  </SignedOut>

  ```env {{ filename: '.env' }}
  CLERK_PUBLISHABLE_KEY={{pub_key}}
  CLERK_SECRET_KEY={{secret}}
  ```

  ### Configure `clerkPlugin` for all routes

>   The `clerkPlugin` is a Fastify plugin provided by Clerk to integrate authentication into your Fastify application. To ensure that Clerk's authentication and user management features are applied across your Fastify application, configure the `clerkPlugin` to handle all routes or limit it to specific ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The `clerkPlugin` is a plugin that integrates authentication into your Fastify application. You can configure it to either secure all routes or apply authentication to specific ones.
```

  The following example registers the plugin for all routes. To register the plugin for specific routes only, refer to the [**Using Clerk for specific pages only**](/docs/quickstarts/fastify#using-clerk-for-specific-routes-only) section.

  > [!IMPORTANT]
  > The `dotenv/config` module must be imported before any Clerk modules. This order is important because Clerk instances are created during the import process and rely on environment variables, such as API keys, to be initialized correctly. For more details, refer to the [Fastify docs](https://fastify.dev/docs/latest/Guides/Getting-Started/#loading-order-of-your-plugins).

  ```ts {{ filename: 'index.ts' }}
  import 'dotenv/config'
  import Fastify from 'fastify'
  import { clerkPlugin } from '@clerk/fastify'

  const fastify = Fastify({ logger: true })

  fastify.register(clerkPlugin)

  const start = async () => {
    try {
      await fastify.listen({ port: 8080 })
    } catch (error) {
      fastify.log.error(error)
      process.exit(1)
    }
  }

  start()
  ```

  ### Use `getAuth()` to access the auth state and protect routes

>   The `getAuth()` helper retrieves the authentication state from the current request. In the following example, the `userId` loads the entire [`User`](/docs/references/javascript/user/user) object from Clerk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The `getAuth()` helper retrieves the authentication state from the current request.
```

Reviewer: let's just keep it consistent across docs. we don't want to say "in the following example" just yet because its repeated two paragraphs below.

>   [`clerkClient`](/docs/references/backend/overview) is an instance of Clerk's JavaScript Backend SDK, which provides access to Clerk's Backend API resources and low-level  utilities for handling authentication in JavaScript environments. With `clerkClient`, you can manage users, sessions, and metadata by interacting directly with Clerk's API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [`clerkClient`](/docs/references/backend/overview) is an instance of Clerk's JavaScript Backend SDK, which provides access to Clerk's Backend API resources and low-level  utilities for handling authentication in JavaScript environments.
```

Reviewer: let's just keep it consistent across docs.

  The following example uses `getAuth()` to retrieve the `userId`, which is used to protect the route and is passed to `clerkClient.users.getUser()` to retrieve the current user's `User` object.

  ```ts {{ filename: 'index.ts', mark: [3, [9, 17]] }}
  import 'dotenv/config'
  import Fastify from 'fastify'
  import { clerkClient, clerkPlugin, getAuth } from '@clerk/fastify'

  const fastify = Fastify({ logger: true })

  fastify.register(clerkPlugin)

  fastify.get('/', async (request, reply) => {
    const { userId } = getAuth(request)
    const user = userId ? await clerkClient.users.getUser(userId) : null

    return reply.send({

>       message: 'Authentication state retrieved successfully.',

Reviewer: We aren't returning the auth state, we're just returning the user object

```suggestion
      message: 'User retrieved successfully.',
```

      user,
    })
  })

  const start = async () => {
    try {
      await fastify.listen({ port: 8080 })
    } catch (error) {
      fastify.log.error(error)
      process.exit(1)
    }
  }

  start()
  ```

  To protect a route using Clerk, use the `getAuth()` method to check if the user is authenticated. If not, it returns an error response. If authenticated, it retrieves the user information using `clerkClient`.

  ```ts {{ filename: 'index.ts' }}
  fastify.get('/protected', async (request, reply) => {
    try {
      const { userId } = getAuth(request)

      if (!userId) {
        return reply.code(403).send({ error: 'Unauthorized request.' })
      }

      const user = await clerkClient.users.getUser(userId)

      return reply.send({
        message: 'Authentication state retrieved successfully.',
        user,
      })
    } catch (error) {
      fastify.log.error(error)
      return reply.code(500).send({ error: 'Failed to retrieve user information.' })
    }
  })
  ```

> </Steps>

Reviewer: So what I was saying in the comment before about merging the code examples, as shown [here](https://github.com/clerk/clerk-docs/pull/1201/files#diff-b704145027aa89795fd84c206c02c3f07082daaa6be1549c2f531aede6330774R122)

all you have you do is throw
`if (!userId) {
        return reply.code(403).send({ error: 'Unauthorized request.' })
      }`

into the code example above it.

having both of these examples is extremely redundant. they're doing the exact same thing, except the first doesn't have an auth check and the second does.

### Configure `clerkPlugin` for specific routes

If you want to use Clerk for specific pages only, you can register the plugin for specific routes. In the following example, the routes are split into public and private routes.

```ts {{ filename: 'index.ts' }}
import 'dotenv/config'
import Fastify, { FastifyPluginCallback } from 'fastify'
import { clerkClient, clerkPlugin, getAuth } from '@clerk/fastify'

const fastify = Fastify({ logger: true })

const protectedRoutes: FastifyPluginCallback = (instance, options, done) => {
  instance.register(clerkPlugin)

  instance.get('/protected', async (request, reply) => {
    const { userId } = getAuth(request)
    if (!userId) {
      return reply.code(403).send({ message: 'Access denied. Authentication required.' })
    }

    const user = await clerkClient.users.getUser(userId)

    // Only authenticated users will see the following message
    reply.send({ message: 'This is a protected route.' })
    return { user }

>   })

Reviewer: is this supposed to be in this format:

`reply.send({ message, user })`

without the `return { user }` ??

  done()
}

const publicRoutes: FastifyPluginCallback = (instance, options, done) => {
  instance.get('/', async (request, reply) => {

>     return { message: 'This is a public route.' }

Reviewer: when is return used  vs when is reply used?

    ```
  </CodeBlockTabs>

  ### Set your Clerk API keys

  <SignedIn>
    Add the following keys to your `.env.local` file. These keys can always be retrieved from the [API Keys](https://dashboard.clerk.com/last-active?path=api-keys) page of your Clerk Dashboard.
  </SignedIn>

  <SignedOut>
    1. Navigate to the Clerk Dashboard.
    1. In the navigation sidebar, select [API Keys](https://dashboard.clerk.com/last-active?path=api-keys).
    1. In the **Quick Copy** section, copy your Clerk publishable and secret key.
    1. Paste your keys into your `.env` file.

    The final result should resemble the following:
  </SignedOut>

  ```env {{ filename: '.env' }}
  CLERK_PUBLISHABLE_KEY={{pub_key}}
  CLERK_SECRET_KEY={{secret}}
  ```

  ### Configure `clerkPlugin` for all routes

>   The `clerkPlugin` can be registered globally or for specific routes. The following example registers the plugin for all routes. To register the plugin for specific routes only, refer to the [**Using Clerk for specific pages only**](/docs/quickstarts/fastify#using-clerk-for-specific-routes-only) section.

Reviewer: This explains how `clerkPlugin` can be used, but not what it is. This needs an intro sentence

  > [!IMPORTANT]
  > The `dotenv/config` module must be imported before any Clerk modules. This order is important because Clerk instances are created during the import process and rely on environment variables, such as API keys, to be initialized correctly. For more details, refer to the [Fastify docs](https://fastify.dev/docs/latest/Guides/Getting-Started/#loading-order-of-your-plugins).

  ```ts {{ filename: 'index.ts' }}
  import 'dotenv/config'
  import Fastify from 'fastify'
  import { clerkPlugin } from '@clerk/fastify'

  const fastify = Fastify({ logger: true })

  fastify.register(clerkPlugin)

  const start = async () => {
    try {
      await fastify.listen({ port: 8080 })
    } catch (error) {
      fastify.log.error(error)
      process.exit(1)
    }
  }

  start()
  ```

>   ### Use `getAuth()` to access the current auth state

Reviewer: The explanation here needs more context. It doesn't explain `clerkClient` even though its being used in the code example. Check out the copy [here](https://github.com/clerk/clerk-docs/pull/1201/files#diff-b704145027aa89795fd84c206c02c3f07082daaa6be1549c2f531aede6330774R112) for an example.

  The `getAuth()` method can access the authentation state of the current request. In the following example, the `userId` loads the entire [`User`](/docs/references/javascript/user/user) object from Clerk.

  ```ts {{ filename: 'index.ts', mark: [3, [9, 17]] }}
  import 'dotenv/config'
  import Fastify from 'fastify'
  import { clerkClient, clerkPlugin, getAuth } from '@clerk/fastify'

  const fastify = Fastify({ logger: true })

  fastify.register(clerkPlugin)

  fastify.get('/', async (request, reply) => {
    const { userId } = getAuth(request)
    const user = userId ? await clerkClient.users.getUser(userId) : null

    return reply.send({
      message: 'Authentication state retrieved successfully.',
      user,
    })
  })

  const start = async () => {
    try {
      await fastify.listen({ port: 8080 })
    } catch (error) {
      fastify.log.error(error)
      process.exit(1)
    }
  }

  start()
  ```

>   ### Use `getAuth()` to protect specific routes

Reviewer: This section can be combined with the one above. See how its done [here](https://github.com/clerk/clerk-docs/pull/1201/files#diff-b704145027aa89795fd84c206c02c3f07082daaa6be1549c2f531aede6330774R112)
